---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Designing and Programming a Memory Match Game using C# in Visual Studio
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2022-02-06
labels:
  - Individual Project - MemoryMatch Game
---
My name is Scott Snider and I’m currently finishing up my associate degree in Information Technology at Sullivan University. The following essay will provide the details of a five-week project in the principles of system design course. For my project I decided to design a simple game using C# programming language that can be played using Visual Studio. I’m going with matching game that requires the player to use their memory in order to match corresponding graphics from random squares.

In week one, the first task that I wanted to complete was deciding what the game would look like. I used the windows form app in Visual Studio to create the layout of my game. I decided to go with 12 squares, meaning that the player would be trying to match six different sets of images from those squares. I also needed to assign rules of the game in order to provide a way for the player to win the game. The game is pretty basic so the only rules that I had for the game were that the player could only click two squares at a time. If the images of those initial squares were matches, they would remain visible to the player but if they didn’t match, they would disappear after a couple of seconds.

Since I had a good idea of how my game would play out and the rules if required, I started week 2 by starting to compile the code for my game. For my graphics, I went with a font on my computer that uses images instead of letters. I knew I had to make these random to create a guessing game to match like images. I had to write code enforce my main rule, which is that only two clicks were allowed, if they match both remain showing but if not, they both are hidden from the player after a couple of seconds. When designing the form of the game I set the timer in the properties to ensure the images would quickly disappear to make the game somewhat of a challenge.

Going into week 3, my plan was to finish compiling the code to my game and to fix any errors that came about. I only had two errors to debug that were preventing the game from flowing the correct way. The first problem that came about was that the game was allowing me to click as many squares as I wanted. I was able to quickly fix this error and continue with completing the coding process. The second problem that I encountered was that non matching images were staying visible instead of disappearing into the square. I was able to fix this part of the code by using “if” and “else” statements in the code.

My plan for week 4 was to fine tune my code and ensure that the game could be played to completion without any errors. After completing the debugging process in Visual Studio, it was time to run a test to see how the game played out. The game flowed exactly how I envisioned it, so I knew that my code had to be correct. I was able to click two squares at a time, when I had a match both squares remained visible and when they didn’t, they quickly became hidden. I successfully match all six sets of images and all twelve squares were visible. When this occurred, I received a pop-up message that told me that all images had been matched, I could then click OK to end and close the game.

Finishing this project gave me a sense of accomplishment. It had been so long since I used some of the skills that I learned so it was nice to see it all work out. Writing the system requirements specifications was the most challenging part for me because it was something that I’ve never done before and didn’t really understand how to get started. After researching and looking at some examples of SRS documents I was able to put them together for my project. My favorite part of the whole process was the design stage. I really enjoyed creating the UML diagram and then designing the application in Visual Studios. Compiling the code was also something that I had to get refreshed on because it had been a while since I complied anything, but I have to say that it did come back rather quickly.

In conclusion I would have to say that this was a great way to start this course. Completing this project showed me how each stage or phase of the SDLC is vital and extremely important. I feel that completing this project gives me more experience in my field because of all the skills it took to complete. Many I.T jobs are going to require these same skills depending on the job, so the more experience I can get, the better it’ll be for me in the future. Using Visual Studio and writing code in C# language are two area that I want to continue to grow, and I think this course will certainly help with that.
